---

Modal Communism

Artist's impression of a silicon-based life form. Credit: Zita.
Before diving in, I should point out that labels aside, I'm an eco-anarchist according to LeftValues. As a meatspace entity with some background details, you could generally say I'm an afropessimist, and maybe even a bit of a cosmic pessimist, with both Indigenous, Black, German and Mexican ancestry. I'm keen on paradigmatic thinking as opposed to pragmat(icism/ism). I would be a recipient of reparations, should any such Cultural Revolution come to pass. So if you're not interested in hearing a non-Marxist Anarchist wax poetic about communism from a Marxist-Leninist-Maoist orientation, you may want to tab over in your browser. However, some would argue, like Murray Bookchin does, that anarchism just is anarcho-communism; many anarchists see communism as inherently anarchistic since if communism is stateless it must necessarily be anarchistic, along with horizontalism, temporalism, abolition of the value-form, etc, etc, etc. At the same time, communists, at least the MLMs anyway, aren't really in favor of anarchy, leaning into explicit authoritarian doctrines (albeit with international solidarity as their grounding of normativity; they permit some level of hierarchicalization of necessity, generally temporary and local to geographic contexts, to be responsive to oppositional militaristic political entities and as a means to abolish the present state of things). So anyway, if everything I've just said this far already frustrates your leftist sensibilities, you may dismiss me and this work. Godspeed!


---

The following approach to defining communism concerns formalizing theorems, as opposed to axioms, which would make possible a non-Marxist system-theoretic information framework which could express viable hypotheses that are empirically-friendly. A reader might ask if the development of an empirically-grounded communist thought can in fact be "revolutionary" in a certain important sense, and at the same time, a reader may be concerned that persons necessarily must be excluded through the grounding in "empiricism". To the first point, since the cultural codification of the Western Enlightenment the West has seen only one attempt after another to appeal to "transcendental" this or that, anything but transcendental realism. A trend since the time of Descartes has been to appeal to introspection and since then we have really only seen one form or another of "rationalism" or minimally epistemologically-oriented systems. Even with "pragmatism" we have as yet a genuinely empirically-friendly doctrine. We have yet to see a science of philosophical Decision, but rather nothing more than an architecture of distinctions, from Kant to Sellars, that isn't exactly empirically-governed save in name, like when Sellars might argue that the manifest image must give way to the scientific image while as yet S. J. Gould's NOMA, an actual scientist (sorry for the appeal to authority!), would undermine the very framework of Sellarsian thought. It would seem, then, that a formalization of the empirical would in fact be a revolution, historically speaking, of philosophical thought, as opposed to yet another philosophical-grounding of the empirical. The second point: my given approach, in principle, cannot be said to leave mouths unfed in the same way the fantasy of fantasy does that money, or the "sacred totemic mediator of liquid goods" (Empire of Value), does. To say the least, empirical bodies in principle should not be excluded from the determinations of the information framework. With hope, indeed, we should even have a presented here a "fully-automatic luxury gay space communism". So where do we begin? Let's start with the scary parts.
Those I inherit from Sébastian Fauvel, who has authored Quantum Ethics, and Paul Cockshott, who has generally authored a wealth of literature on using computers to support his ideations of the road to communism, and Yuji Ijiri, the founder of (the true) "momentum accounting". With any hope, this framework should make the possibilities of decentralization and a non-static formation palpable where one sees "central planning" as worrisome in Cockshott's cybercommunism, along with all the expected properties one should expect of a communistic framework: stateless, moneyless and classless. Conceptually, we also utilize, unsurprisingly, machine learning non-trivially, specifically Momentum-based Gradient Descent, and Cantor's proof to bring this framework together, again, hopefully avoiding Cantor's Paradise, which anyone should rightly consider a kind of genocide of humans and worse other forms of life. This ain't no Last Man's communism!
The key idea is that we want to utilize Fauvel's notion of "periodic collapse with a given elementary period" of the quantum state along with Cockshott's concept of periodic system revision based on information about "both consumers' preferences and the relative cost of producing alternative goods" such that "mental categories" so formalized condition the modal cost function for spontaneously ordering representations of a self-regulating system-theoretic organization of decentralized decision-makers acting on social flows, rather than stocks, which represent management of their own momentum (Yuji Ijiri). For calculation of the implications of sets of final outputs "for the required gross outputs of each product" I utilize Cantor's diagonalization technique such that a mental state is randomly selected (generated) that corresponds to a real number which can be used as an input data that can be mapped to variables which may automatically, albeit with possible supervision, by definition, enable updating internal learning parameters (weights and biases) representing those consumer preferences and relative costs. Ideally, these preferences and costs can be explicitly expressed in semiotic web using ReST (with hypermedia as the engine of application state) such that service/content words may allow for Continuous Discovery as web pages may be embedded in image macros (memes), discovered in IoT devices and servers via webpages, whether P2P or client-server in nature. A DHT-based web of trust will be essential to facilitating the mental models of identity, which we aim to map to OCEAN, as we want to talk about subsystems as if they were living cybernetic organisms involved in downward causation over agents conceptualized as languaging semiotic cyborgs. Bitemporal modeling, E-Series and Mobile TLA+ will also be integral to this framework's implementation.
Another important conceptual foundation involves the respect matrix. We want to use this model of thinking as a basis for ensuring that updating learning parameters is also informed along lines of mutual respect so determined by users' commitment to sharing gossip as opposed to finding truth and important it is for enabling dispute resolution in a fundamentally decentralized manner. Think of respect matrix as conceptually or formally integrating a-positionality (a coherence check on mental state selection) into the representational system, as a response to the failures of intersectionality and identity politics as a normative grounding for not only not being responsive to anti-blackness but also as more often than not re-enforcing neoliberalism, despite these ontological positions having theoretical importance in describing the antagonisms which activate the libidinal economy. Explicitly, for the respect matrix so used here it is presumed that we can separate antagonisms from conflictual relations, and implied respect relations can help regulate consumer preferences aforementioned (e.g., give is a means of undermining the tendency to deny Black people housing or to reply less frequently to their e-mails under institutional settings, like as university professors are known to do based on their first and last names).


---

So let's start with some bare essentials. Alexander Galloway has given a succinct characterization of the distinguishing between analog-to-digital and digital-to-analog conversion. I want to use his idea, for one, to address the transformation problem common to Marxist thought, insofar as I might define it in terms of loss of information. We can easily think of 5 + 7 = 12 as "destroys" "atomic" information (like the plus operator), it's irreversible as you cannot get back to the original {N, +, M}. The mathematical expression may be categorized as a digital-to-analog conversion (the two returning as one). Now let's use this basic idea to think about Yuji Ijiri's momentum accounting:
Past = Present
Of course, we can look a certain distance into the past based on the A series conceived as an array we operate over using addition to some arbitrary limit:
\summation{Past(-1), Past(-2), …, Past(n)} = Present
All this tells us is that from the present we lose not only the atomic information, the operator so used, but also under the concept of temporality, we also lose out on the ordering relations between past events. The point I want to establish here is by analogy, we can think of countless kinds of "events", but chiefly let's adopt Laruelle's notion of event, as either decisions (consumer preferences) or relations (relative costs of producing alternative goods). By Fauvel's formalization we can think of the Present as a summation of "mental states" temporally organized:
\summation{M(-1), M(-2), …, M(n)} = Present
Tying back to the respect matrix, we can perform this summation over a matrix such that respect "flows through time" along with the mental categories. What is the Present? Well, we can use Cantor's diagonalization technique to generate the present as if we were generating the future. We can linearize layers of respect in order to determine subjective probabilities for the Present and use a homomorphic intersection to establish uniqueness properties of decisional behavior for a present randomly selected mental state which we use to map to the variables given. Think of it as the Present data sharing with some past mental state which cannot be tampered with despite loss of atomic information. The real number generated for the Present mental state can be conceived as all past mental states "thinking together" which we update to determine a set of alternative Present states so to analyze and update internal learning parameters. So essentially the Present is a diagonalization result that is bound and used to itself randomly select a past mental state with the understanding that we have technically "periodically collapsed" along an elementary period. We actually have a stored correlational matrix of all the mental states so used in the determination of the present but yet we have simulated the as the new mental state generated is mapped to the summation result, S, thus satisfying our period where S represents the summation of consumer preferences. The present, ultimately, means nothing on its own except but to allow for us to map it to S such that the elementary period may be formalized for the progression of the system, to measure its system-theoretic properties. So the past mental states are being used to generate what is effectively a mental signature that is sufficiently unique while mapping that signature to, also, a matrix of consumer preferences which can have respect-relations at any given time along evolutionary periods. The basic idea here is that we don't want to have a Present that could be mathematically equivalent to any known mental state nor indistinguishable from the matrix of value, as it were, that correlates consumer preferences and relative costs for the purposes of self-regulation (revision) of sets of targets for final outputs.